Yale :

Finance is one of the highly paid profession's in the world.
wallstreet : umbrella term to describe the financial markets and the companies that trade publicly on exchanges throughout the U.S.
wallstreet is synonymous to financial markets of the United States.
Wall Street is a street located in the lower Manhattan of New York City.It is headquarters of some of the largest U.S brokerages and investment banks and New York Stock Exchange.

MIT:

session 1: Introduction  and Course Overview

    The only reason the Finance Industry exists is because of Time and Risks.
    Finance is a term for management, creation, and study of money and investiments. Specifically, it deals with the questions of how an individual, company or government acquires money called capital in the context of a business and how they spend or invest that money.

    Mathematics + Money = Finance 
    Finance is a systematic study of Financial transactions of Money.
    Mathematics can be used to make money.

    All Business Activities Reduce to Two Functions:
        Valuation of assets (real/financial,tangible/intangible)
            this is more challenging part of it.
        Management of assets (acquiring/selling)
            which of two possibilites is more valuable
    
    This is true for any kind of business.
    what is valuable is a hard question. Water is necessary but invaluable,Diamonds are unnecessary but valuable.
    you cannot manage what you cannot measure.
    Valuation is the starting point for management.
    once value is established, management is easier.

    Objectives + Valuation => Decisions
        pick the decisions that are most valuable to your objectives.

    Valuation is generally independent of Objectives.

    the value of the box in his experiment was 45 dollars,as that was the highest bid.Now that number could be used for Analysis.
    Knowing nothing about what was inside the box,we established the value.That is remarkable.
    The information effects the valuation.
    The lack of information can reduce or increase the value of an asset.

    in this course we come up with Analysis ways to find the value,once the valuable is known,the management becomes easier.
    if you want to get rid of something and you sell it at 66% discount,the deal might be amazing for you even though the value of that asset was higher,hence objectives matter as well.
    
    Accounting is the first step of Financial Analysis.
        flow: rate of change of assets.
        stock: the level of assets.

        Balance sheet: snapshot of financial status quo (stock)
        income statement: rate of change of the status quo (flow)
        Financial status <> Balance sheet 
        Financial decisions <> income statement

        income statment tells you how much money is company making per unit time.

        Balance sheet contains data about Assets eg Cash,Capital,intangibles and liabilities like Equity and Debt
        income statment contains  Sources of Funds = Uses of Funds typically on quarterly bases.
        this is what warren buffet uses to decide things.
        liability is like owing.

    Corporate Financial Decisions:
        Cash raised from investors.(Selling financial assets)
        Cash invested in real assets (tangible and intangible)
        Cash generated by operations
        Cash reinvested 
        Cash returned to investors (debt payments,dividents, etc )

        Financial Manager is the person between Corporate Operations and individual and institutional investors.

        And Management is about dealing with one or few of these Decisons.
        Objective is to maximize the valuation of owners.

        even your life can conform to this Framework.

    without time and risk Finance is just micro-economics.
    Time: cashflows now are different from cashflows later,Time flows in one one direction,how to model temporal differences.
    Risk: under perfect certainty,finance theory is complete,Risk creates significant challenges,how should we model the unknown.
    we use historical data and Mathematics(probability and statistics).althought challenges can overwhelm the maths.

    six fundamental principles of Finance: these are approximation for underlying truths.
        there is no such thing as a free lunch.
        given other things equal,individuals prefer more money to less (non-satiation),prefer money now to later(impatience),prefer to avoid risk(risk aversion)
        All Agents Act To further their own self-interest.
        financial markets prices shift to equalize supply and demand.
        financial markets are highly adaptive and competitive
        risk sharing and friction are central to financial innovation.

    course structure:
        Introduction
        valuation
        Risk
        Corporate finance
        putting it all together.

    
Session 2: Present Value Relation I 

    in his experiment the bigger box with book got sold for 60 dollars and smaller one at 45 dollars,so sometimes the size of the package does matter.
    Retail value: the price retailers might for the item.
    Mortgage: lend money at interest in exchange for taking title of the debtor's property, with the condition that the conveyance of title becomes void upon the payment of the debt.
    A loan is the sum of money borrowed from a financial institution to meet various goals or requirements. It may be collateral-free or secured.Mortgage refers to an immovable property that is used as collateral to avail a loan.

    Asset: Business entity, Property, plant, and equipment. Patents,R&D, Stocks ,bonds,options,..,Knowledge,reputation,opportunities etc.
    From a Business Perspective, An Asset Is A Sequence of current and  future Cashflows.
        Asset = {CF1,CF2,CF3,CF4,....}
        A startup is an Asset.
    The algorithms are assets.
    You can buy a Patent,Sell a Patent,License a Patent,Transfer a Patent.
    Coke formula is a Trade secret,it is not a Patent.
    Patent is a legal agreement,that if you tell me everything i need to know about it,you can have exclusive right to make it for certain period of time,say 17 years.And if anyone wants to use it,they have to pay you.
    Patent process creates Assets out of ideas.The other way is to keep it a secret,and Coke has been doing it well.
    There are lots of different Assets.
    With Patent you can go investors and ask for money with confidence whereas with secret you cannot do it.
    hence even intangibles can be Asset.

    An Asset is different at different points in Time.
        E.g Apple Stock is different from what it was 5 years Ago.
    
    Having an Asset is same as having a Cashflow.
    Assets are the molecules of Finance Theory and cashflows are electrons and protons of it.
    An Asset with all negative cashflows is a liability.
    An Asset is the Sequence of cashflows from Present,it is not the summation of them.
    reputation is an asset as people choose you so additional cash flow becomes of it becomes an asset.
    you can have common cashflow for multiple assets.
    The reputation of a building or a gym is an asset.

    an asset is simple,but the hard part is Cashflows.

    Valuing An Asset requires valuing a sequence of cashflow.
    sequence of cashflows are the basic building blocks of finance.
    Value of Asset at t=Value at t (CFt,CFt+1,CFt+2,....)
        one example of Vt is value in any market,althought one market can be better than another.
    at high level value of an asset is at how much would someone buy it,which in itself is a cashflow with only one data point.

    time and uncertainty play major role in valuing an asset.
    the value operator : Vt
    in case of uncertainty we use approximations.

    like you convert two currencies into common currency and then compare,otherwise we cannot. Same thing applies to cashflows on different dates,you need a common date.
    Vt is sum of value of all cashflows in common thing.
    Net present value: V0(CF0,CF1,...) and if there is initial investment,then CF0<0,rest of CF can be postive or negative.
    net present value is basically V0.
    you get exchange rates for currencies from the market,and same for the value of things over time,you also get it from market.

    discount factor/exchange rate: a number you multiply future values to get present value,usually less than 1.
    not just inflation,deflation can also occur.
    inflation and time value of money are not completely one and the same thing.
    one you figure out valuation,management is trivial.
    friction in currency convertion: means you don't get to convert from one currency to another for free.
    supply and demand : more people want 1 dollar today than tommorow,hence dollar today is worth more than 1 dollar tommorow.
    r : interest rate/growth rate/opportunity cost.
        you get r from market.And market might give you multiple r's.
        with r you can move back and forth in time.
        it is inverse of discount factor.

session 3: Present value Relations II 

    take projects that have positive Net Present Value,don't can ones that have negative NVP.
    value of an asset is a number that you generate from a sequence of cashflows.
    with higher interest rates money now is more valuable, and the interest rate comes from open market.
    with proper valuation, management decisions are get easier, although there might be other factors as well.

    the perpetuity: it is a simple and cute cash flow.
        perpetuity pays constant cashflow C forever.
        PV=C/1+r  + C/(1+r)^2 + ..... till infinity ,and it starts with first year.
        PV = C/r 
        
        if C is compounded at g percent every year. r>g,if r=g then we get infinite.
            PV=C/(r-g)
    
    the Annuity: simple application of V0 
        PV=C/(1+r) +.... + C/(1+r)^T 
        PV=C/r(1-(1/(1+r)^T))
        Annuity is a security that pays fixed amount for finite period of time,and then it stops paying. eg a bond or an autoloan or a Mortgage.
        in Mortgage you take money and pay back say annually for n years to cover it with interest.
    
    banks give interest at APR= annual percent rate/effective annual rate of 10%. your money is compounded daily or months basis.as giving 5% for 6 months could be compounded to get more at the end of the year than 10%.
    banks are forced to tell you if it is APR or not.
    hence if you get 10% and you get your money after 6 months,you don't get 5% .they compound smartly such that if compounded for whole year you get 10%.

session 4: Present value Relations III 
    leverage of 5:1 means four parts came from bank and 1 from me. if the price of house drops by 10% bank doesn't care as you have to pay in whole and you bear the loss.but if the price of houses increase you get the whole profit.
    hence 20:1 leverage is high risky if prices go up and down very often.

    inflation:
        change in real purchasing power of $1 over time irrespective of time value of money.
        it is different from time-value of money.
        inflation measures purchasing power of money now vs later. it is possible that a dollar buys you more next year.


youtube:
    financial institutions:
        depository institutions:
            accept deposits 
            eg commercial bank: it is a corporation, it has stock holders etc, it is for profit organisation. they offer pretty much everything.
            Another example would be credit union,it is smaller than commercial banks, they are usually non-profit. its goal is to serve its members,it doesn't have shareholders,it has board members etc.
        non depository institution:
            life insurance companies.
                you pay premium and you die and you get money.
            investment companies.
                eg mutual fund: it takes money from a lot of sources and invests in a lot of things.
            brokerage companies/firms
                you hire and adivsor and he helps you buy stocks etc.
            credit card companies. like short term loans.
            Mortgage companies:
                that deals with Mortgages.
                you obtain a loan to buy a home,and they access your ability to pay.
            Finance company.
                a company that provides loans.
financial institutions provide money related services.
people and companies use these institution for variety of uses.
governments intervene when a financial institution goes bankrupt.
the health of financial institutions directly impacts the economy.

Trading: buying and selling shares. you don't care about what company does,you just analyse the share trend,called technical analysis.
investment: you keep it for long time. Done based on Financial statment of company, past performance, future growths, called fundamental analysis.

stocks/shares/equities mean pretty much the same thing.
in stock market,seller submits price at which they are willing to sell,buyers submit price to buy at.when the lowest selling price meets the highest buying price,a deal is done.this whole thing is automated.
don't put all your eggs in one basket.
you need a broker to trade in earier days it was a person, and there might be a commision per buy.
money loses money over time because of inflation.
index fund: putting investment in index say (top 100 in US) best for beginners.
it is hard to beat index fund.
if you don't have index fund,invest in index fund.
put money say for 5 years.
in the long term,the stock market always goes up.
in term long investing,you always make money.
don't put money that you might need in next 3 to five years.
value of stock depends on supply and demand,high demand means price goes up.
a public company has to declare finance statments 4 times a year.
a company usually has a few billion shares,say 7 billion for microsoft.2 billion for meta.
outstanding shares are shares that investors trade with,the shares that company keeps is called treasury shares and together are called issued shares.
headline stock price of the share you see is the latest price that a share was sold at.
exchanges calculate the value of share by finding the value at which the maximum number of shares are being transactions.
in primary market IPO happens and then the shares are traded in secondary market.

